Okay,
my name is Roger Galatis and I'm president of the
Woodlands Corporation. I've been with the
Woodlands Corporation now since February of 1979
and had an opportunity to participate in the
growth of the Woodlands during that period of time
and also Prior to 1979, I lived in a local area,
worked for a competing real estate development
company whose name is Friendswood Development
Company, a subsidiary of Exxon, and had an
opportunity to watch the Woodlands grow from its
beginning and monitored and participated in that
growth through its 16-year history to this point.
The Woodlands is 16 years old October 19th.
Everything you see here today and what you will
encounter has occurred in 16 years.
Remarkable. Now, in Friendswood, in terms of what
Friendswood was doing as compared to what the
Woodlands... Well, Friendswood and all the
company is wholly owned subsidiary of the Exxon
Corporation. And they have developed
large-scale communities in Houston, Clear Lake
City, which is where the NASA Space Center is
located. And actually, it was the first
large-scale plane community to be developed in
the Houston region. That started in the late 50s,
actually, and active development work in the
early and mid-60s. The second large community
that Princewood developed was a joint venture
with King Ranch. And it's called Kingwood, which
is located 25 miles to the east of the woodlands.
Both of those very large scale, similar in nature
to the woodlands in terms of scope and size and life
expectancy and those kind of things. So I had some
reference to judge what was happening in the
woodlands in the early days and make the move to the
woodlands when I first came in contact with George
Mitchell. Well,
I was happily working for Friendswood, and I got a
call one day from an executive search firm, and the
question was, would you like to join the Woodlands
development? And my first answer was, no, I'm
happy where I am. Well, that conversation went on
for a while, and the short story is that after
several conversations, I elected to to join the
Woodlands, and that was in 1979, and I've been here
continuously since that time. Had you contacted
George Mitchell, had conversations with him
before that decision, personally? I knew George
Mitchell by reputation, but not personally, and I
knew the Woodlands by observation, and I knew a
number of the people who lived and worked in the
Woodlands, so I had some knowledge of what was
happening, but no personal knowledge of Mr.
Mitchell and his a visionary approach and
enthusiasm for doing things in a visionary way. So
that's not what brought you into this firm? No, it
was not that per se. I guess one of the things that
was intriguing about coming to the Woodlands was
the fact that it was in Montgomery County, a county
where I established home, a place I wanted to
remain probably for the rest of my life. It was at
the stage of development where a lot of potential
existed for the future, and I thought the timing
was good to make that move. Did you move in as
President? Yeah, President. No. Originally I
came to the Woodlands and was responsible for the
residential part of the development here, the
residential community, which includes all the
infrastructure and support structures, support
structure for the residents who lived here,
including schools and churches and that kind of
infrastructure. I originally came as Senior Vice
President of Residential Development, later
became Executive Vice President of the company,
and in 1986 became President of the
company. You know George Mitchell now. Very well.
You must have a feel for what it is he wanted you to
do. As you got promoted through the company, you
must have a sense of, I don't want to call it an
agenda, but he obviously had certain things that
he had you in mind to do. Well, George is a person who
has a great vision for the future. And sometimes it
takes lesser men a longer period of time to
understand what that vision is. But George's
enthusiasm never wanes. George never loses a
battle. Maybe he's not yet won it, but he's not –
he's never lost it.
I mean, I think that's a very good point. I mean, I
think that's a very good point. I mean, I think
that's a very good point. I mean, I think that's a
very good point. today are already solved. They
may not like the solution, but nonetheless,
they're solved. And he's thinking about 30 years
down the road. And that describes Georgia about as
well as any attempt to describe Georgia I've
heard. And it's impressed me since I've heard
Frank make that statement.
I made a talk one time, and I said working for George
Mitchell is fairly simple. what you need to do is do
it with integrity do it with quality make sure you
save the trees and natural vegetation and do it
right now if you do those things you're in pretty
good shape with george i think that's a consistent
formula i would guess you george is not
inconsistent george is very consistent in his
approach and he's uh One of the things George does
and insists that this company do, and I think it's a
tribute to him and it's comfortable for us, is we
put a lot back into this community. We expect to
make a profit. We're in the business to make a
profit. But there are many things that we do as a
development company that puts value back into the
community that has long-lasting effects and will
have long-lasting effects on this community for
years and years to come. but maybe a typical
developer in other places might not do. For
example, there's a program of art in public
places, and as you drive through the community,
you will see major works of art that's been
installed in public esplanades or in your
building. I think we have about 13 pieces of major
artwork now that have been funded both by the
development company and by other companies who
bought land from us and built buildings. We set
aside a portion of our land sales revenue, and a
portion of the cost of constructing the building
into an art fund. And that fund is used to not only
acquire art pieces, but also to maintain those
that have been acquired over time. We also just
finished building and developing the Cynthia
Wood Mitchell Center for Performing Arts in the
Woodland, which is about a $10 million
contribution that obviously is going to add value
to the community. add value to the remaining lands
we have to develop and sell. But it's something
that didn't have to be done. It's something George
wanted to do. He felt very strongly that it needed
to be a regional asset for the city of Houston as
well as the woodlands in Montgomery County. And
this past year we had probably, in its first year of
operations, 30 different performances there
that included the ballet, the symphony,
contemporary music, country music, a whole array
of programs. And more than 200,000 people came to
attend those 20 to 30 performances, an average of
6,000 people for each performance. What was your
vision for the Woodlands when you joined this
company? Did you see it as something really
different from what you'd been doing? Well, the
Woodlands is probably more comprehensive than
most other large-scale communities in the
Houston region and is as comprehensive as any in
the country. There are only five, six, maybe 10
places in the country where a community like this
is being developed in a comprehensive nature. So
it's a unique employment
opportunity. It gives you national exposure.
international recognition not not just as an
individual but the community and the quality of
what's being done here is recognized as being
quality one thing i see during here in the
traditional new community concept is in fact this
idea of the economic community yeah and i sense
that maybe this is one of your special for us well
explain how that's being developed early on we we
We recognized clearly we were not just in the real
estate development business, but we had to be in
the economic development business if we were to
succeed,
which is different from some other large-scale
communities. We started out, in fact, with a large
residential component, a recreational
component. But simultaneously with that, we set
about the mission of developing jobs in the local
community. When did that come along? Was that
already part of the program when you came in? Yeah,
it was in the fledgling stage. We've expanded it
over the 12 years I've been here. But that was part
of the mission. Our goal and objective is to create
jobs along with housing and residential
population. Right now we have close to 8,000
permanent jobs in the woodland. The original
objective was to have one job for every household
in the Woodlands. Today we have about 11,500
households and 8,000 jobs. But we also have about
2,000 retirement units in the Woodlands. So if you
take those out of the workforce, we're pretty
close to imbalance. And I think the very
impressive thing about that is we've been able to
create those jobs during a period of time when
Houston lost 200,000 jobs in its economy. Let's
talk about the 1980s now. OK, the 1980s. 1979,
you're here, and the economy is just about to go
into a spin, I guess. Starting in 1980, late in 79,
through 1982, the Houston economy, the Texas
economy was very robust.
Frankly, I guess we went through a period of
arrogance in Texas and developed a reputation
which was deserved, but not very pleasing in other
parts of the country. The price of oil was
escalating and energy was king. Jobs were being
created in the Houston economy at the rate of
65,000, 70,000 jobs a year. The population was
growing at 90,000 a year. Tremendous need for
housing, tremendous need for office buildings,
tremendous need for shopping and support
services. And frankly, a lot of things could be
built in the without much thought given to
quality, quality of life, and those kinds of
things. And then in 1982, when the first decline in
oil prices became apparent,
some of that robust nature of the economy started
drifting away. And by 1986, things were really
pretty bad in the Houston economy as well as
throughout the state of Texas. And it became quite
apparent that if we were going to compete on a
national scale and attract businesses into the
Houston region and diversify our economy and get
away from being 80% dependent on energy and try to
bring in companies like Compaq Computer and
biotechnology firms and things that would give us
a broader economic base, We were going to have to
pay attention as a city, as a region. We were going
to have to pay attention to the quality of life
issues. And that really played into the hands of
the Woodlands very nicely because from the
outset, our mission was to deal with quality of
life. And back in 1982, we sold in the Woodlands, if
I recall, as one measure of activity, I think we
sold 1,000 new homes that year. But we only had...
2.8% of the housing market in Houston. In the
downturn in 1987-88, which was about the bottom of
it, we were selling maybe 500 homes in Houston, but
we had captured maybe 10% or 11% of the total
market. So while absolute numbers had declined,
our market share had grown tremendously. And
today, the five large-scale communities in
Houston capture about 40% of the housing market in
Houston, which says that in five locations,
almost one out of every two new home sales made in
Houston are in those five locations. And those
five locations, while they differ in scope and
size and somewhat in approach, they do address
quality of life issues. And I think the lack of
zoning in Houston and the ability of these
large-scale communities through restrictive
covenants in effect establish a zoning so that
people would know where the shopping centers are
going to be and the apartments are going to be and
the single-family housing are going to be,
coupled with the mission of creating jobs in the
local community and enhancing the mobility to get
from this location to other job locations for
those who did not work here, greatly enhanced the
position of the woodlands and the other
large-scale communities in the Houston region.
Let me interrupt for a second and ask a question.
You mentioned that in the downturn, and I don't
want to put words in your mouth, but what I'm
hearing you say is that the Woodlands was
appropriately positioned to take advantage of
quality of life issues. The quality of life issue
has been something from the inception. That's
right. We've heard. Did you, at the same time,
though, I mean, was this a passive thing? Did you
just reap a benefit? Or in fact, was there some sort
of marketing effort, aggressive or low key, to go
out and sell the concept of the Woodlands to other
parts of the country? No. We aggressively
marketed the product that we were building. And we
were able to more clearly focus on the quality of
life issues in that marketing approach. And we did
things beyond marketing. Marketing is sort of an
all-encompassing word. It includes selling, it
includes advertising, but it also includes
building a product. And I think we were building a
product was the main thing. For example, we have
planted the seed that led toward the development
of a hospital in the Woodlands, which provided a
delivery for health services in this local
community and in this region surrounding the
Woodlands. We also followed that same model and
have have assisted in the development of a private
college preparatory school here in the
Woodlands. It's called the John Cooper School. We
donated land. We guaranteed some of the financing
for the first building to be constructed. We
helped recruit the faculty and helped identify
key board members to serve on a nonprofit
corporation that owns it. Now, that does a couple
of things for you. One, it expresses clearly your
involvement in quality of life issues, and you're
concerned for education, elevation of the
educational standards. But in addition to that,
it helps you to attract businesses here,
particularly in the high-tech area, in the
biotechnology and the medical field, which we
actively pursued through the involvement of the
Texas Medical Center, because those people are
interested in quality education for their
children, and they're more likely to live in an
environment where that educational opportunity
is available, where quality housing is
available, a broad cross-section of housing
opportunities are here, and medical services are
available. So it's... But you have gotten
cooperation and support from the Texas Medical
Center, not competition in terms of... Well,
Texas Medical... Institutions in the Texas
Medical Center are separate and apart from the
Texas Medical Center, which is a non-profit
corporation itself. We've dealt with Baylor
College of Medicine, University of Texas Health
Science Center, now MD Anderson, and all of those
have a presence here in the Woodlands. And an
interesting thing that happened in this
diversification effort in Texas and in the
Houston region, before the downturn occurred,
the Texas Medical Center engaged in tremendous
research programs. They wrote about those
research programs, published it in the England
Journal of Medicine and other companies,
pharmaceutical companies in other parts of the
country and overseas,
Europe and Japan particularly,
took those academic findings and converted that
to a product or a process that created commercial
growth. And George Mitchell had the notion that
You know, that could happen right here in Houston,
Texas, and more particularly here in the
Woodlands. And he formed a venture capital
company to help medical schools fund startup
companies so that they could develop and benefit
from their academic work in a commercial field.
And that benefited the Woodlands because we could
build buildings to house that activity. The
scientists would live here in the Woodlands and
they would buy homes here. So it was, I think, a very
good marriage that once again came out of the
provision of George Mitchell and his willingness
to invest funds to make it happen. Did this
basically start with a hospital and then started
to expand? No, the hospital came along. The
hospital actually was a separate initiative, not
directly tied to the medical research in the
medical center. It was tied to the clinical
aspects of the medical center. And it was needed
actually to help deliver it. In the early days,
1975, 76, 77, a group of people in the Woodlands
came together. And this is what's nice about the
Woodlands. The developer doesn't have to do
everything here. It's the quality of people who
come in and make this a very special place. Given
the chance, they'll solve a lot of their own
problems and give them some initiative and
encouragement. But a group of people came
together something called the Woodlands Medical
Center, Inc. And they just, they had this
question, how do we provide medical services for a
growing community that one day will be 150,000
people? And it started out with a vision of having a
clinic with two beds in it and so that you could have
outpatient services. And that notion grew into a
100 bed hospital before it was constructed. But
this was outside the framework of the Woodlands
Corporation. Well, we were deeply involved in it.
We were involved in it. I spent eight years of my
life working on it. But that was the facility. We
had a nonprofit corporation with a board of
directors comprised of people who lived in this
community and also some people who were
associated with Baylor College of Medicine and
Methodist Hospital. through that nucleus of
people and some funding on our behalf and some
planning that we put into it, we now have a hundred
bed hospital operating here. It's a non-profit
corporation. And that same model was used to
develop the private school. Okay, so that's sort
of a style of management, isn't it? Right. And that
evolved, you know, you learn as you go along. One
other that has occurred here that involves Texas
A&M and Rice and the University of Texas, the
University of Houston, with the formation of the
then the Houston Area Research Center, which has
modified its name to the Houston Advanced
Research Center, still using the acronym HART.
But that's modeled after the research triangle in
North Carolina. When North Carolina looked at
itself and its economic futures. Back in the 60s,
they tried to assess what their strengths were.
And the tobacco industry was going down,
agriculture was going down. But they had a strong
involvement of academic institutions and a need
for research. So they formed this 5,000-acre
block of land called the Research Triangle. is a
triangle actually between the University of
North Carolina and the North Carolina State and
Duke. And they formed something very similar to
HART, which is the Research Triangle Institute.
And it was the nucleus that has led to the
development of more than 30,000 jobs in that
location now, and the world-renowned for its
research activities and high-tech
manufacturing. facilities. I guess IBM is the
largest single employer there. What was the
initiative behind the park? Were you involved in
that? Yeah, I was involved in it on the periphery.
George Mitchell, once again, had the notion, had
the bulldog determination to make it work.
Willing to put some of his personal funds into it to
make it work. The company donated, agreed to
donate 100 acres of land for our campus upon which
it would be built. And provided some of the initial
funding for the first several buildings that were
built and now it it once again is a freestanding
non-profit corporation not under the control and
direction anyway of the woodlands corporation
but it is here in the woodland and it does things
that benefits the community do you have a sense it
sounds to me like what you're saying is the
strategic planning occurs in the head of your
commission well a lot of the initiative comes from
that we've to try to put it into a strategic plan
that can be implemented from there. He tried a lot
of the vision that has gone into this place. Do you
have a sense or an opinion of the beauty of what
you've described is
the plan already existed. It becomes more
important because of some economic turmoil in
Texas. The notion to diversify the Houston
economy, of course, is also going to benefit the
Woodlands tremendously. And these other
policies that have developed, such as the attempt
to get a portion of the University of Houston
campus here, the Hark, all these other kind of
things, all feed into the same goal. I guess what
I'd like to know is, or it would be interesting to
ascertain your sense of
of how you fit into that strategic planning
matrix. You're involved also in making policies.
What we're trying to do as we interview people is
identify what's the contribution of this
individual toward the whole that is becoming the
woodlands. And
for all time and eternity, Someone's going to say,
Roger Galatis did A, B, C. Where do you fit? Well, I
guess I would have to say that I'm deeply involved
in the overall planning and development process
as it relates to the day-to-day functions that
take place in this community. I have a deep
involvement personally with people in the
community. this community is not going to be any
stronger than the fabric that holds it together.
And I guess if I have a sense of mission myself, it's
to make sure that the institutions that are put in
place fit into the overall strategy of what's
being accomplished here in the woodlands. We work
closely with churches. We work closely with
community groups. We work closely with the
schools. We work closely with things like the
Lions Club and their fundraising activities. We
work closely with the YMCA. I was personally
involved in helping bring the YMCA, a regional
YMCA, into the Woodlands. I serve on the board of
the private school and the board of the hospital.
And I guess my function is to make sure this grand
strategy is implemented in a timely and effective
way. I would like to think I add something to that
vision, but when placed against Mr. Mitchell's
vision, I guess few of us here would reach to those
great heights. I say that. But you implement it.
Yeah, and there are a lot of us implementing it. I'm
not sure. George's vision, I don't mind saying
this on tape, and I don't mind you writing it down so
George can hear it, but I only wish I was doing about
20% of the things that George Mitchell thinks I'm
doing. He's a very stimulating individual, and he
has a,
he says if you're not working on five or six things
at one time, you're not being productive. And we
all have, it's a challenge to accomplish all the
things that George would like to have
accomplished in a time frame that he thinks would
be appropriate and suitable. But he also is a very
understanding individual. And he's
compassionate,
sometimes not understood by everyone that comes
in contact with him initially, because he is
thinking about the future. And so many of us are
focused on today's problem. When you see these
things, such as the medical Park, I guess, and the
research park, the Cooper School. Are you
essentially putting a ship out at sea to see what's
going to happen, I guess? No, I think we have a
rudder on the ship. I think we have a sense of
direction. And sometimes when we start, though,
we don't know exactly how we're going to get there,
exactly what form it's going to take. And I don't
think that's necessarily a combination of the
management of this place. Sometimes you just
don't have all the answers, you know, where you'd
like to get to, you know, what you'd like the
mission to be, what you'd like to accomplish, but
you're really not sure just to judge how you're
going to get there, how it's all going to be funded.
And I think if you took time to understand all that,
you may not get there. Yeah. Is that, in fact, the
uniqueness of the woodlands? You mentioned
Kingwood, which is completely different. I mean,
it's a nice community, but it's a completely
different. Yeah, I worked there for a long time.
The orientation of just driving through the
place. It's different. It's totally different.
Is the uniqueness of the woodlands, this emphasis
on infrastructure, what you're talking about, is
that really what sets it apart from? Well, I think
there's several things that sets it apart. One, I
can kind of list them, and this is not saying we're
better or they're better, but it's an observation
of differences. or diligently to preserve the
natural environment, natural vegetation. You
drive into the woodlands, and you don't see 30,000
people. And you don't see 5 million square feet of
on-road space. And you don't see 12,000 homes. You
don't see a conference center. And to the people
who live here, they really like that. To some
people who see it for the first time, they don't
understand it. And it's not traditional. And it's
a marketing challenge, frankly,
people when they're moving into the Houston
region, they like things that they have seen in
other places and they relate to them. But if we can
get a shot at them and talk to them for a while and let
them talk to people who live here, they will
understand that this natural environment and
natural vegetation is really dysfunctional. It
serves to eliminate the stormwater runoff that
forms more water when you urbanize the place
you're not creating flooding on your neighbors
adjacent to you it provides a buffer for sound a
visual buffer it provides an environment for
sustaining wildlife just down the street there's
a bank building between here and the bank building
it's not uncommon to see deer crossing the road and
it's in a fairly populated area but the wildlife
still is evident here, and it will continue to be
that. Twenty-five percent of the land is being set
aside as a permanent open space as far as the
development plan. Twenty-five percent. Another
thing that is different here as compared to other
places is when you drive in, you don't see the
typical grocery store on the right and the service
station on the left. You have to drive back into the
community. to village centers to find shopping
and retail facilities. Actually, it's located
convenient to where people live. You just don't
drive past it coming in and leaving. Another thing
that is, I think, strikingly different is this
intensive effort to create economic growth
within the community and not be just a residential
commuter community, but to give people an
opportunity to live and work in the same
environment without the necessity to get in an
automobile and drive great distances to go to
work. I guess those are three things that I would
say are different. And the scope of the Woodlands
is different. The size is 25,000 acres. Kingwood
is 14,000 acres. The Woodlands is the largest
single landmass that's been developed in the
history of the You also mentioned the church.
Wasn't there a concerted effort by the Women's
Corporation to, in fact, incorporate, invite, in
fact, sustain religious and social and, again,
these quality of life? Yeah. In the early days,
there was created something called interfaith.
And interfaith is not an ecumenical
movement to do away with individual
denominations at all. In Columbia, Maryland,
that was attempted, and it failed. It was going to
be one church, you know, when you start dealing
with the religious community and doing away with
the domination, you're treading on thin ice. But
here, the Interfaith was an umbrella
organization that helped fledgling churches
find a site in the woodlands. We helped them build a
building, which served as a place for a
congregation to meet in the lake before they built
the building. It sort of coordinated the early
religious activity with each religious
denomination, keeping their own identity
intact. And that organization still exists. It
operates a daycare center. It has an outreach
program for senior citizens. It does a lot of
charitable things in addition to coordinating
activities for churches. But right now, I think
there are 19 church buildings in the Woodlands
that have been built. Some 23 congregations, two
or three have not yet built their own sanctuary.
See, I think that's significant. How do you make
money off the churches? Well, you don't. You
don't, that's right. But it helps develop a fabric
in the community. That's right, that's right. And
another thing we've done here, I'm proud of this.
I've been involved in this from the outset. We have
had an ongoing program to provide housing for
senior citizens. And it takes... various forms
one we have subsidized housing for seniors who
cannot afford to rent apartments so we have some
600 700 rental apartments that is subsidized and
that that's a negative word in a lot of places
subsidized housing you think how detrimental
that would be to other property values but in fact
it has not been here but senior citizens live in
rental apartments We have a congregate care
facility with 300 units in that where people need
some assistance in living, but not at the level of
the nursing home. But we do have a nursing home
here, too. And we have four generations of
families living in the wilderness today, and
we're only 16 years old. And it's worked this way.
First, the young couple comes to buy a home.
They've been transferred here from Ohio. And they
have a couple of young children. So that's two
generations there. When their parents retire in
Ohio, instead of moving to Florida and not knowing
them in Sun City, where you don't know anybody
except other people who are retired, they have
elected to come and live close to their children.
THE PRESIDENT. So that's really happening.
THAT'S RIGHT. THE PRESIDENT. And even the
great-grandparents have come. And there are
housing opportunities throughout the Woodlands
for that, those four generations.
retirees live in subsidized housing some choose
to live by their own home and live independently
just as you and i would do that but there's been this
this concerted effort to create the extended
family in reverse you know after world war ii
families were scattered across the united states
and the grandparents stayed back at home and the
kids left and they formed their home in another
city and kids didn't get to grow up with their
grandparents. I think something happened to
society during those years, in the 50s and 60s. And
here in the Woodlands, I'm pleased that we're part
of bringing some families back together. True,
it's an economic opportunity for us, but also it's
a strengthening of family ties. Is this basically
the S&M of your demographic plan, I guess that is,
that it's a family-oriented community. Well,
it's family. We have a fairly good number of
singles that live here. I think 40% of the families
who live here have no children. And that's a
national trend across this country. Families are
waiting later to have children. Some have none at
all.
there are also very strong family ties that exist
in the community too what about an economic
spectrum of the society trying to provide
something for everyone yeah as i say we have
subsidized housing for the elderly we have
subsidized housing for families or individuals
who don't qualify for it i guess in total there are
1500 subsidized units in the woods or something
like that We have more subsidized housing in the
woodlands than any other community in Houston
that is a planned community. Is it subsidized only
for the elderly? No, some for families,
low-income families, low- and moderate-income
families. And that's to get a mix. Yeah, it was. The
social scheme of planning was to provide the broad
cross-section of housing opportunities for a
heterogeneous population. That's got to fit the
new community. Yeah, well, that was part of the new
community program that was conceived by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Affairs, which
failed miserably. This is the only community out
of 13 that was formed under that Title VII new
community program that came about in 1971 that
succeeded, that did not go into foreclosure.
There are several that are still active, but it was
after they went into foreclosure and they did not
pay the bond of indebtedness that they were
obligated to pay. But this one succeeded, and it
succeeded, I think, for some very valid, basic
reasons. One, it was adjacent to a growing
metropolitan area. It was on a major interstate
highway that led into the business district, and
we were not too far removed from that. We were close
to an international airport. There was good
transportation, there were jobs existing in the
local area, and the ones who failed didn't meet
those criteria. It was a social experiment with
the notion that if you started a new city out in an
isolated part of the world, people would transfer
from the inner city and all those problems they had
would go away and they would start life anew and
things would be wonderful and great. But it
doesn't work that way. People who move into this
community bring the problems with them that they
had. I think the environment helps them deal with
those problems, perhaps, and cope with them. But
it certainly doesn't do away with them. By having a
good school system, and we do have a good public
school system, I mentioned the private school,
And that didn't come about out of dissatisfaction
with public schools, it's just a supplement to the
public schools. But by having a good school
system, this growing family relationship, jobs
in the local area, I think a good array of
recreational opportunities that kids can use as
well as adults, the involvement of churches in the
community, and the establishment of traditional
institutions the YMCA, the YWCA, the Kiwanis
Club, the Lion Club, the Rotary Club, all of those
kind of things have come together in a very nice way
here in the Woodlands. Let me ask you one other
question. You piqued my curiosity. I've heard
four times now, and it's all exactly the same, you
know, one of the reasons why the Woodlands
succeeded, whether it's because it's close to a
major metropolitan area, it's on the interstate,
you know, the airport number. Did that come out of,
and an in-house study, or was there an independent
study? Because everyone we've talked to says the
same thing. Well, maybe we were lucky we bought the
land in the right place, but George Mitchell, once
again in an attempt to diversify his own company,
which was predominantly oil and gas, and still is
largely oil and gas, saw the growing north side of
Houston as a a real estate development
opportunity and he started acquiring lands here
in the early 60s through the mid-60s and there were
a number of large timber companies that owned
sizable types of land and taxes and other reasons
made it non-productive for timber use and george
bought a lot of land for a very reasonable price and
i don't think George may disagree with it, but I
don't think George knew exactly what he was going
to do with it when he was buying it. He had not
formulated all the plans, but he knew that the
north side of Houston was the intercontinental
airport, the interstate highway to Dallas, the
wooded environment, the low cost of land at that
time, the growth of Houston. All of those were
ingredients that would lead toward a successful
real estate development, which at that time was
not I don't think it's totally defined. It evolved
over a series of years of planning. Did he say that?
No, that he bought the land. In fact, some of it he
just bought, actually thinking he couldn't lose
because he could cut the timber off it and come out
ahead. Yeah, in fact, he said that. I think this
thing has, George's enthusiasm and vision has led
the way, but He's attracted some good people to
come and help him think through the process, too,
in the early days. But one thing that's
interesting to me, it does seem that you have a
style of management here that I haven't seen in too
many places. I teach business and economic
history. But what you're doing is creating these
little autonomous divisions here that are really
not controlled by you and that you're involved
with. I'm not sure what management style that is,
decentralization and diversification or
something like that, but it seems to work.
Actually, developing... communities is a
management style that you probably don't find in
other places. You're involved in this thing 24
hours a day, seven days a week, and you're involved
with people who are your neighbors, and that's
another point I want to make. I think one thing
that's made us successful in dealing with the
community is we're not absentee developers. Most
of our employees live right here in the Woodlands,
and we see our neighbors, and we see them in the
grocery store, and we see them at functions, and So
when a problem develops, they're dealing with
somebody they know. And it's on a different level
than if it's a big developer in another city that is
controlling this place and controlling my life.
Now, that's not to say that there are not some
problems that develop in the community. There are
things that some people in the community want that
we can't provide, can't provide in the way that
they perceive to be timely. There are some people
that even say they've been deceived and misled. I
would debate that with them, but nonetheless, if
they feel that way, they feel that way. But that's a
very small minority of people. And I'm pleased at
the good relationship we have in this community. I
live here, have a phone number and a telephone
book, and don't feel uncomfortable at all in going
wherever I go. And really am not... not put in any
awkward positions because I... Because you're in
a corporation. Yeah, right. And I think other
people who live here and work here have that same
experience. Since being president of the company
in 1986, what have been your primary
preoccupations, let's say? What have you had both
an incentive accomplishment and nightmares
about, I guess? Well, you know, in 1986, the
economy of Houston was at its lowest to have
been... at least in my memory. So the challenge of
continuing to develop and maintain this
community at a profitable level was certainly a
challenge. We had to trim our workforce. We had to
cut back our capital budgets. We had to do things
that other companies did. And frankly, some of
that was not very pleasant on a personal basis. but
we did it and we survived what about your
relationship with the builders for example
they're very good builders like building in the
woodlands we have about 20 home builders that
purchase lots from us to build homes we help some of
them market their homes and some sell their own but
they like working in an environment like the
woodlands because we we're not incorporated so we
don't have an infection system imposed upon us by a
city But we have established architectural
controls, building standards, and put in effect
an inspection program of our own so that every
builder has to meet certain quality standards.
And they like that because no one takes advantage
of the system. They're all on a level playing
field. And so they can build to those quality
standards and know that somebody else is not
undercutting their marketing by building a
second quality We
have building inspectors. We have one person who
does nothing but inspect the clearing of building
sites to make sure that they're not over-cleared
during the construction process. You can look at
the buildings here and you see it's only cleared
five or ten feet away from the construction of that
building. That's not by accident. You really have
to work at that. Well, I bet you do. The temptation
or tendency of builders... Come in with a
bulldozer. Let's get all the trees out of the way so
we can build a house, and then we'll plant some
trees after we get...